Add document covering the current linux installers packaging process (#914)
adoptium/installer: docs/Guide_To_The_Linux_Installers.md

# Maintaining The Linux Installer Packaging Process

This document is intended to provide a guide to the most common works needed to maintain and produce the current set of linux installer packages.

## 1. Overview Of The Linux Installer Packaging Process

> The linux installer packaging process, current consists of the following elements:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The linux installer packaging process, currently consists of the following elements:

```

  ### 1.1. Jenkins Linux Packaging Job
  

>   This job which has restricted access, requires several inputs that drive the packaging process, these inputs are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This job which has restricted access. It requires several inputs that drive the packaging process:

```

  
  + JDK / JRE - Whether you would like the packaging process to produce the installer packages for the JDK or JRE
  + Java version option (Which version of Java to produce packages for)
    + Current Options : 8, 11, 17, 21, 22 
  + Architecture - (Which hardware platform to build for)
    + Current Options :
      + x86_64
      + armv7hl ( RHEL / Suse Arm 32 Platform Option )
      + armv7l ( Debian Arm 32 Platform Option )
      + aarch64
      + ppc64le
      + s390x
      + riscv64
      + all (This will attempt to run for all of the available architectures)
  + Distribution - (Which Linux distributions to build for)
    + Current Options :
      + Alpine
      + Debian
      + RHEL
      + Suse
      + all (This will attempt to run for all of the available distributions)

> There are a number of restrictions around combinations of architecture and platforms, these are detailed in Appendix A, below, but the [jenkinsfile](https://github.com/adoptium/installer/blob/master/linux/Jenkinsfile) has been coded to exclude these from the build processes, details here are included for reference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a number of restrictions around combinations of architecture and platforms detailed in Appendix A below. For our CI/CD pipelines, the [jenkinsfile](https://github.com/adoptium/installer/blob/master/linux/Jenkinsfile) has been coded to exclude these from the build processes, details are included here for reference.

```

  ### 1.2. Gradle / Docker Package Build & Test Process

> The jenkins job above once triggered, performs a build, using gradle, and a dockerfile to produce, installer packages for the supported versions of each of the 4 distributions that we currently support, ie .apk (Alpine), .deb (Debian) & .rpm (RHEL & Suse). The versions of each specific distribution supported can be viewed in the [jenkinsfile](https://github.com/adoptium/installer/blob/master/linux/Jenkinsfile), by searching for the deb_versions variable, or the distro_Package variable, the table below shows the current supported versions, but this does change on a regular basis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the jenkins job is triggered, it performs a build using Gradle, and a Dockerfile to produce installer packages for the supported versions of each of the 4 distributions that we currently support, i.e., `.apk` (Alpine), `.deb` (Debian) & `.rpm` (RHEL & Suse). The versions of each specific distribution supported can be viewed in the [jenkinsfile](https://github.com/adoptium/installer/blob/master/linux/Jenkinsfile) by searching for the `deb_versions` variable, or the `distro_Package` variable. The table below shows the currently supported versions, but this does change on a regular basis.

```

Supported Linux Distros:
Distribution Type| Supported Versions
----------|---------
Apk (Alpine)| All supported version.
Deb (Debian)| Trixie (Debian 13)<br>Bookworm (Debian 12)</br>Bullseye (Debian 11)<br>Buster (Debian 10)</br> Noble (Ubuntu 24.04)</br>Jammy (Ubuntu 24.04)</br>Focal (Ubuntu 20.04)</br>Bionic (Ubuntu 18.04)
RPM (RHEL)| centos 7</br> rocky 8</br>RHEL7 , RHEL8 & RHEL9</br> Fedora 35, 36, 37, 38 ,39 , 40</br>Oracle Linux 7 & 8</br>Amazon Linux 2
RPM(SUSE) | Opensuse 15.3</br>Opensuse 15.4</br>Opensuse 15.5</br>SLES 12</br>SLES15

> As part of this process, the packages are first built, using the appropriate mechanisms, and then a set of unit tests are executed to ensure the builds have completed correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As part of this process the packages are built using the appropriate mechanisms and then a set of unit tests are executed to ensure the builds have completed correctly.

```

  ### 1.3. Package Signing & Upload

>   The final part of the jenkins job is triggered when either/both of the enable enableGpgSigning and uploadPackage options are selected. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The final part of the jenkins job is triggered when either/both of the enable `enableGpgSigning` and `uploadPackage` options are selected. 

```

  The Gpg signing uses the Adoptium Gpg key to sign the installer packages prior to their upload to the [Jfrog artifactory, hosted at packages.adoptium.net](https://packages.adoptium.net/)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## 2. Preparing The Source Code For Package Builds & Releases

> Prior to building and releasing any packages, the source code that controls the process requires a number of updates. These updates typically happen once all of the linux platforms for a particular Java version have been released and the binaries uploaded to Github.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prior to building and releasing any packages, the source code that controls the process requires a number of updates. These updates typically happen once all of the linux platforms for a particular Java version have been released, and the JDK/JRE binaries uploaded to GitHub.

```

> Prior to updating the source code, its important to have an understanding of how the source code is structured so that the correct files can be updated. The callout below, highlights the structure of the source code so for example underneath the linux top level directory, a selection of either jdk/jre, followed by the distribution, and then the vendor (temurin in the example), followed by the Java version. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prior to updating the source code, its important to have an understanding of how the source code is structured so that the correct files can be updated. The callout below, highlights the structure of the source code, for example underneath the `linux` top level directory, a selection of either jdk/jre, followed by the distribution, and then the vendor (temurin in the example), followed by the Java version. 

```

```
-- linux
  -- jdk / jre
    -- alpine / debian / rhel / suse (Distribution)
      -- src
        -- main
          -- packaging
            -- temurin / dragonwell / openj9 (Package vendor)
              -- 8 / 11 / 17 / 21/ 22 (Java version)
```

The following sections will detail the source changes required when a release is done, similar changes are made to both jdk/jre and are also similar between versions. Changes should be made in the specific vendor version being edited. The examples shown in this document assume a Temurin release is being undertaken.

  ### Per Distribution Guide To Code Changes

  <details><summary>2.1 Alpine Linux</summary>

>   To update the source files for each new Alpine release, the ``ÀPKBUILD`` file ( located under _jdk_ / alpine / src / main / packaging /_temurin_ / _21_for example) must be updated in several ways, there are 2 sections of the APKBUILD file that need to be considered..

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For example, to update the source files for each new Alpine release, the ``ÀPKBUILD`` file ( located under _jdk_ / alpine / src / main / packaging /_temurin_ / _21_) must be updated in several ways. There are 2 sections of the APKBUILD file that need to be considered..

```

  <h5>2.1.1 The header section (example below)</h5>

>   In this section, the key fields that must be amended are as follows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  In this section, the key fields that must be amended are:

```

>   <b>pkg_ver</b> : This field should be amended to the version tag of the release being processed, e.g , 21.0.3_p9.</br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <b>pkg_ver</b> : This field should be amended to the version tag of the release being processed, e.g., 21.0.3_p9.</br>

```

>   <b>pkgrel</b> : This field should be reset to 0 for the first release of a package, and then incremented should there be patches or additional rebuilds of this package version.</br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <b>pkgrel</b> : This field should be reset to 0 for the first release of a package, and then incremented if there are patches or additional rebuilds of this version.</br>

```

>   And additionally were an additional architecture being added (Alpine is currently only supported on x86_64 and Alpine from JDK version 21 onwards), then the <b>arch</b> field would also need appending.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If an additional architecture is being added (Alpine is currently only supported on x86_64 from JDK version 21 onwards), then the <b>arch</b> field would also need appending.

```

  Once all changes are made in the header section, its time to move on to the footer section.  

    ```
    pkgname=temurin-21
    pkgver=21.0.3_p9
    # replace _p1 with _1
    _pkgver=${pkgver/_p/_}
    _pkgverplus=${pkgver/_p/+}
    _pkgvername=${_pkgverplus/+/%2B}
    pkgrel=1
    pkgdesc="Eclipse Temurin 21"
    provider_priority=21
    url="https://adoptium.net"
    arch="aarch64 x86_64"
    ```

<h5>2.1.2 The footer section (example below)</h5>

>   In this section, the key fields that must be amended are the architecture specific checksum, as shown below. These checksums are released alongside the binary files uploaded to Github, so these checksums can be obtained from there. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  In this section, the key fields that must be amended are the architecture specific checksums, as shown below. These checksums are released alongside the binary files uploaded to GitHub, so these checksums can be obtained from there. 

```

  Again, were another architecture being added an additional element in the case statement below would be required, along with its checksum.
  
  <b>NB:</b> Note how the case statement uses the values from the <b>arch</b> field in the header section to determine the correct checksum to use.

```
case "$CARCH" in
	x86_64)
	  _arch_sum="8e861638bf6b08c6d5837de6dc929930550928ec5fcc81b9fa7e8296afd0f9c0"	;;
	aarch64)
		_arch_sum="0f68a9122054149861f6ce9d1b1c176bbe30dd76b36b74c916ba897c12e9d970"
		;;
esac

sha256sums="
$_arch_sum  OpenJDK21u-jdk_${CARCH/x86_64/x64}_alpine-linux_hotspot_$_pkgver.tar.gz
e9185736dde99a4dc570a645a20407bdb41c1f48dfc34d9c3eb246cf0435a378  HelloWorld.java
22d2ff9757549ebc64e09afd3423f84b5690dcf972cd6535211c07c66d38fab0  TestCryptoLevel.java
9fb00c7b0220de8f3ee2aa398459a37d119f43fd63321530a00b3bb9217dd933  TestECDSA.java
```

</details>
<details><summary>2.2 Debian Distributions</summary>
</br>

> To update the source files for each new Debian release, there are potentially 3 files that must be updated. These 3 files are ```changelog , control & rules``` ( located under _jdk_ / debian / src / main / packaging /_temurin_ / _21_for example) below are the files, and how to update them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To update the source files for each new Debian release, there are potentially 3 files that must be updated. These 3 files are ```changelog , control & rules``` ( located under _jdk_ / debian / src / main / packaging /_temurin_ / _21_) below are the files, and how to update them.

```

<h5>2.2.1 The changelog file (example below:)</h5>

> When actioning a new release, or a patch to an existing release the changelog file, should have an additional section added to the top of the file (the most recent change is at the head).  The version number should be updated appropriately (e.g. 21.0.3.0.0+9) and then additionally the final element (-1) should be changed to be -0 for the first release, and then incremented by 1 for each subsequent release. In addition to the version number the release date and timestamps should also be updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When actioning a new release, or patching to an existing release, the changelog file should have an additional section added to the top of the file (the most recent change is at the head). The version number should be updated appropriately (e.g. 21.0.3.0.0+9) and then additionally the final element (-1) should be changed to be -0 for the first release, and then incremented by 1 for each subsequent release. In addition to the version number the release date and timestamps should also be updated.

```

```
temurin-21-jdk (21.0.3.0.0+9-1) STABLE; urgency=medium

  * Eclipse Temurin 21.0.3.0.0+9-1 release.

 -- Eclipse Adoptium Package Maintainers <temurin-dev@eclipse.org>  Wed, 17 Apr 2024 00:00:00 +0000
```

<h5>2.2.2 The rules file (example below:)</h5>

> The second file that should be updated as part of a release is the Debian rules file. This contains the URLs of the binaries published to Github along with their checksum. It contains a pair of values (a tarball url, and a checksum) per architecture, and it is these values used to create the .deb packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second file that should be updated as part of a release is the Debian rules file. This contains the URLs of the binaries published to GitHub along with their checksum. It contains a pair of values (a tarball url, and a checksum) per architecture, and it is these values used to create the .deb packages.

```

amd64_tarball_url = https://github.com/adoptium/temurin21-binaries/releases/download/jdk-21.0.3%2B9/OpenJDK21U-jdk_x64_linux_hotspot_21.0.3_9.tar.gz
amd64_checksum = fffa52c22d797b715a962e6c8d11ec7d79b90dd819b5bc51d62137ea4b22a340
arm64_tarball_url = https://github.com/adoptium/temurin21-binaries/releases/download/jdk-21.0.3%2B9/OpenJDK21U-jdk_aarch64_linux_hotspot_21.0.3_9.tar.gz
arm64_checksum = 7d3ab0e8eba95bd682cfda8041c6cb6fa21e09d0d9131316fd7c96c78969de31
ppc64el_tarball_url = https://github.com/adoptium/temurin21-binaries/releases/download/jdk-21.0.3%2B9/OpenJDK21U-jdk_ppc64le_linux_hotspot_21.0.3_9.tar.gz
ppc64el_checksum = 9a1079d7f0fc72951fdc9a0029e49a15f6ba114683aee626f882ee2c761f1d57
s390x_tarball_url = https://github.com/adoptium/temurin21-binaries/releases/download/jdk-21.0.3%2B9/OpenJDK21U-jdk_s390x_linux_hotspot_21.0.3_9.tar.gz
s390x_checksum = f57a078d417614e5d78c07c77a6d8a04701058cf692c8e2868d593582be92768
riscv64_tarball_url = https://github.com/adoptium/temurin21-binaries/releases/download/jdk-21.0.3%2B9/OpenJDK21U-jdk_riscv64_linux_hotspot_21.0.3_9.tar.gz
riscv64_checksum = 246acb1db3ef69a7e3328fa378513b2e606e64710626ae8dd29decc0e525359b
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

<h5>2.2.3 The control file (example below:)</h5>

> The final file, that typically only requires updates if this is the first release of a new jdk, or alternatively a new architecture is being added. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The final file typically only requires updates if this is the first release of a new jdk, or alternatively if a new architecture is being added. 

```

# Maintaining The Linux Installer Packaging Process

This document is intended to provide a guide to the most common works needed to maintain and produce the current set of linux installer packages.

## 1. Overview Of The Linux Installer Packaging Process

The linux installer packaging process, currently consists of the following elements:

  ### 1.1. Jenkins Linux Packaging Job
  
  This job which has restricted access. It requires several inputs that drive the packaging process:

  
  + JDK / JRE - Whether you would like the packaging process to produce the installer packages for the JDK or JRE
  + Java version option (Which version of Java to produce packages for)
    + Current Options : 8, 11, 17, 21, 22 
  + Architecture - (Which hardware platform to build for)
    + Current Options :
      + x86_64
      + armv7hl ( RHEL / Suse Arm 32 Platform Option )
      + armv7l ( Debian Arm 32 Platform Option )
      + aarch64
      + ppc64le
      + s390x
      + riscv64
      + all (This will attempt to run for all of the available architectures)
  + Distribution - (Which Linux distributions to build for)
    + Current Options :
      + Alpine
      + Debian

>       + RHEL

Reviewer 2: RHEL/Fedora ?

Author: Yup, the top level distributions are as this, Its pretty much shorthand for RHEL based RPMs. Theres a 2nd RPM for Suse based distributions.
